---
title: "Glossary"
---

## A

<span id="absolute_error">absolute error</span>
: The absolute value of the difference between the observed and the correct value. Absolute error is usually less useful than [relative error](#relative_error).

<span id="abstract_base_class">abstract base class</span>
: An [abstract class](#abstract_class) from which the [class](#class) in question is derived.

<span id="abstract_class">abstract class</span>
: A class that defines or requires methods it does not implement. An abstract class typically specifies the methods that [child classes](#child_class) must have without providing default implementations
  See also: concrete_class.

<span id="abstract_method">abstract method</span>
: In [object-oriented programming](#oop), a [method](#method) that is defined but not implemented. Programmers will define an abstract method in a [parent class](#parent_class) to specify operations that [child classes](#child_class) must provide.

<span id="abstract_syntax_tree">abstract syntax tree (AST)</span>
: A deeply nested data structure, or [tree](#tree), that represents the structure of a program. For example, the AST might have a [node](#node) representing a `while` loop with one [child](#child_tree) representing the loop condition and another representing the loop body.

<span id="accidental_complexity">accidental complexity</span>
: The extra difficulty added to a problem because of poor notation, poor tooling, an unclear problem statement, distractions, etc. The term is used in contrast with [intrinsic complexity](#intrinsic_complexity).

<span id="accumulator">accumulator</span>
: A variable that collects and/or combines many values.  For example, if a program sums the values in an array by adding them all to a variable called `result`, then `result` is the accumulator.

<span id="active_record">active record</span>
: A [class](#class) that represents each [record](#record) in a database [table](#table) as one object whose fields automatically reflected the [fields](#field) of that table. Active records are one way to implement an [object-relational mapper](#orm).

<span id="actual_result">actual result (of test)</span>
: The value generated by running code in a test. If this matches the [expected result](#expected_result), the test [passes](#pass_test); if the two are different, the test [fails](#fail_test).

<span id="affordance">affordance</span>
: An action that a thing can do: for example, a door can be opened or a document can be printed. Good user interfaces make affordances easy to discover.

<span id="alias">alias</span>
: A second or subsequent reference to the same object. Aliases are useful, but increase the cognitive load on readers who have to remember that all these names refer to the same thing.

<span id="anonymous_function">anonymous function</span>
: A function without a name. Languages like JavaScript make frequent use of anonymous functions; Python provides a limited form called a [lambda expression](#lambda_expression).

<span id="ansi_encoding">ANSI character encoding</span>
: An extension of [ASCII](#ascii) that standardized the characters represented by the codes 128 to 255.

<span id="append_mode">append mode</span>
: An option for writing to a file in which new data is appended to existing data rather than replacing it.

<span id="abi">Application Binary Interface (ABI)</span>
: The low-level layout that a piece of software must have to work on a particular kind of machine
  See also: api.

<span id="api">Application Programming Interface (API)</span>
: A set of functions provided by a software library or web service that other software can call
  See also: abi.

<span id="argument">argument</span>
: A value passed into a function or method call
  See also: parameter.

<span id="ascii">ASCII character encoding</span>
: A standard way to represent the characters commonly used in the Western European languages as 7-bit integers, now largely superceded by [Unicode](#unicode)
  See also: ansi_encoding.

<span id="assembler">assembler</span>
: A [compiler](#compiler) that translates software written in [assembly code](#assembly_code) into machine instructions
  See also: disassembler.

<span id="assembly_code">assembly code</span>
: A low-level programming language whose statements correspond closely to the actual [instruction set](#instruction_set) of a particular kind of processor.

<span id="assertion">assertion</span>
: A [Boolean expression](#boolean_expression) that must be true at a certain point in a program. Assertions may be built into the language or provided as functions.

<span id="atomic_operation">atomic operation</span>
: An operation that is guaranteed to complete, i.e., one that cannot be interrupted part-way through.

<span id="atomic_value">atomic value</span>
: A value that cannot be broken down into smaller parts, such as a [Boolean](#boolean_value) or integer.

<span id="attention_budget">attention budget</span>
: The amount of time your activity is allowed to require of other people in an organization.

<span id="attribute">attribute</span>
: A name-value pair associated with an object, used to store [metadata](#metadata) about the object such as an array's dimensions.

<span id="authentication">authentication</span>
: The process of establishing identity. Authentication relies on something someone knows (such as a password), something they have (such as a key card), or something they are (such as a fingerprint).

## B

<span id="backward_compatible">backward-compatible</span>
: A property of a system that enables interoperability with an older legacy system, or with input designed for such a system.

<span id="base_class">base class</span>
: In [object-oriented programming](#oop), a [class](#class) from which other classes are derived
  See also: child_class, derived_class, parent_class.

<span id="batch_processing">batch processing</span>
: Executing a set of non-interactive tasks on a computer, such as backing up files or copying data from one database to another overnight.

<span id="benchmark">benchmark</span>
: A program or set of programs used to measure the performance of a computer system.

<span id="big_endian">big endian</span>
: A storage scheme in which the most significant part of a number is stored in the byte with the lowest address. For example, the 16-bit big-endian representation of 258 stores 0x01 in the lower byte and 0x02 in the higher byte
  See also: little_endian.

<span id="big_oh">big-oh notation</span>
: A way to express how the running time or memory requirements of an algorithm increase as the size of the problem increases
  See also: space_complexity, time_complexity.

<span id="binary_mode">binary mode</span>
: An option for reading or writing files in which each byte is transferred literally. The term is used in contrast with [text mode](#text_mode).

<span id="bit_mask">bit mask</span>
: A pattern of bits used to set or clear bits in a byte or [word](#word_memory) in memory.

<span id="bit_shift">bit shifting</span>
: To move the bits in a byte or [word](#word_memory) left or right.

<span id="bitwise_operation">bitwise operation</span>
: An operation that manipulates individual bits in memory. Common bitwise operations include `and`, `or`, `not`, and `xor`.

<span id="block_memory">block (of memory)</span>
: A region of memory of a fixed, constant size.  Data is often divided into blocks to optimize input and output at the hardware level; software is then used to convert between blocks and [streams](#stream).

<span id="block_page">block (on page)</span>
: A rectangular region of a page that may contain text, images, and other visual elements along with other blocks.

<span id="http_body">body (of HTTP request or response)</span>
: The "extra" data associated with an [HTTP request](#http_request) or [response](#http_response), such as the file being uploaded or the page being returned for display.

<span id="boolean_expression">Boolean expression</span>
: An [expression](#expression) that is either true or false, i.e., one that produces a [Boolean value](#boolean_value).

<span id="boolean_value">Boolean value</span>
: One of the two values "true" or "false". Named for George Boole, a 19th century mathematician.

<span id="boxed_value">boxed value</span>
: A value (such as an integer) that is embedded in a larger structure in memory that carries [metadata](#metadata) about its type, how many structures are referring to it, and so on.

<span id="breakpoint">breakpoint</span>
: A point in a program where a debugger should halt execution in order to interact with a user.

<span id="bucket">bucket</span>
: A subset of values from a dataset, typically represented by a single bar in a histogram.

<span id="buffer_memory">buffer (in memory)</span>
: A temporary storage area in memory.

<span id="buffer_text">buffer (of text)</span>
: A data structure that stores text while it is being viewed or edited.

<span id="build_manager">build manager</span>
: A program that keeps track of how files depend on one another and runs commands to update any files that are out-of-date. Build managers were invented to [compile](#compile) only those parts of programs that had changed but are now often used to implement workflows in which plots depend on results files, which in turn depend on raw data files or configuration files.

<span id="builder_pattern">Build manager</span>
: A [design pattern](#design_pattern) in which a complex object is filled in step by step after its creation by calling its methods.

<span id="build_recipe">build recipe</span>
: The part of a [build rule](#build_rule) that describes how to update something that has fallen out-of-date.

<span id="build_rule">build rule</span>
: A specification for a [build manager](#build_manager) that describes how some files depend on others and what to do if those files are out-of-date.

<span id="bytecode">bytecode</span>
: A set of instructions designed to be executed efficiently by an [interpreter](#interpreter).

## C

<span id="cache">cache</span>
: Something that stores copies of data so that future requests for it can be satisfied more quickly. The CPU in a computer uses a hardware cache to hold recently-accessed values; many programs rely on a software cache to reduce network traffic and latency. Figuring out when something in a cache is out-of-date and should be replaced is one of the [two hard problems in computer science](#two_hard_problems).

<span id="call_stack">call stack</span>
: A data structure that stores information about the active subroutines executed.

<span id="catch_exception">catch (an exception)</span>
: To handle an error or other unexpected event represented by an [exception](#exception).

<span id="chain_of_responsibility_pattern">Chain of Responsibility pattern</span>
: A [design pattern](#design_pattern) in which each [object](#object) either handles a request or passes it on to another object.

<span id="character_encoding">character encoding</span>
: A way to represent characters as bytes. Common examples include [ASCII](#ascii) and [UTF-8](#utf_8).

<span id="child_tree">child (in a tree)</span>
: A [node](#node) in a [tree](#node) that is below another node (call the [parent](#parent_tree)).

<span id="child_class">child class</span>
: In [object-oriented programming](#oop), a [class](#class) derived from another class (called the [parent class](#parent_class)).

<span id="circular_dependency">circular dependency</span>
: A situation in which a [build target](#build_target) depends on itself either directly or indirectly, i.e., a situation in which the [DAG](#dag) of [dependencies](#dependency) contains a [cycle](#cycle).

<span id="class">class</span>
: In [object-oriented programming](#oop), a structure that combines data and operations (called [methods](#method)). The program then uses a [constructor](#constructor) to create an [object](#object) with those properties and methods. Programmers generally put generic or reusable behavior in [parent classes](#parent_class), and more detailed or specific behavior in [child classes](#child_class).

<span id="class_method">class method</span>
: A function defined inside a class that takes the class object as an input rather than an instance of the class
  See also: static_method.

<span id="clear_breakpoint">clear (a breakpoint)</span>
: To remove a [breakpoint](#breakpoint) from a program.

<span id="client">client</span>
: A program such as a browser that sends requests to a server and does something with the response.

<span id="tag_closing">closing tag</span>
: The textual marker showing the end of an [element](#element) in an HTML document, written `</tag>`.

<span id="closure">closure</span>
: A record that stores a function and its [environment](#environment) so that variables that were in scope when the function was defined can still be accessed from within the function even if they are no longer visible to other parts of the program.

<span id="code_point">code point</span>
: A number that uniquely identifies a character in the [Unicode](#unicode) standard.

<span id="cognitive_load">cognitive load</span>
: The mental effort required to solve a problem.

<span id="hash_collision">collision (in hashing)</span>
: A situation in which two or more values have the same [hash code](#hash_code).

<span id="column_wise">column-wise storage</span>
: To organize the memory of a two-dimensional table so that the values in each column are laid out in contiguous blocks
  See also: row_wise.

<span id="combinatorial_explosion">combinatorial explosion</span>
: The exponential growth in the size of a problem or the time required to solve it that arises when all possible combinations of a set of items must be searched.

<span id="command_pattern">Command pattern</span>
: A [design pattern](#design_pattern) in which operations are represented as objects so that they can be stored and re-used.

<span id="compact">compact (data or files)</span>
: To pack data so as to remove wasted or unused space.

<span id="compile">compile</span>
: To translate textual source into another form. Programs in [compiled languages](#compiled_language) are translated into machine instructions for a computer to run, and [Markdown](#markdown) is usually translated into [HTML](#html) for display.

<span id="compiled_language">compiled language</span>
: Originally, a language such as C or Fortran that is translated into machine instructions for execution. Languages such as Java are also compiled before execution, but into [bytecode](#bytecode) instead of machine instructions, while [interpreted languages](#interpreted_language) like JavaScript are compiled to byte code on the fly.

<span id="compiler">compiler</span>
: An application that translates programs written in some languages into machine instructions or [bytecode](#bytecode).

<span id="file_compression">compression (of file)</span>
: Any of several techniques for reducing the size required to store a file. Compression works by finding patterns and replacing them with shorter sequences of bits or bytes.

<span id="concrete_class">concrete class</span>
: A class that can actually be instantiated. The term is used in contrast with [abstract class](#abstract_class).

<span id="conditional_breakpoint">conditional breakpoint</span>
: A [breakpoint](#breakpoint) at which the debugger should only halt if some user-specified condition is true.

<span id="conditional_jump">conditional jump</span>
: An instruction that tells a processor to start executing somewhere other than at the next address if a condition is true. Conditional jumps are used to implement higher-level constructs like `if` statements and loops.

<span id="confirmation_bias">confirmation bias</span>
: The tendency for someone to look for evidence that they are right rather than searching for reasons why they might be wrong.

<span id="constructor">constructor</span>
: A function that creates an [object](#object) of a particular [class](#class).

<span id="context_manager">context manager</span>
: An object that automatically executes some operations at the start of a code block and some other operations at the end of the block.

<span id="continuation_byte">continuation byte</span>
: The second or subsequent byte in a multi-byte [character encoding](#character_encoding).

<span id="control_code">control code</span>
: Originally a "character" that made a teletype perform some operation, such as moving to the next line or ringing the bell. Only a handful of control codes such as tab and newline are still in common use.

<span id="control_flow">control flow</span>
: The order in which a program executes statements and expressions.

<span id="utc">Coordinated Universal Time (UTC)</span>
: The standard time against which all others are defined. UTC is the time at longitude 0° and is not adjusted for daylight savings. [Timestamps](#timestamp) are often reported in UTC so that they will be the same no matter what timezone the computer is in.

<span id="cross_product">cross product</span>
: The set of all possible combinations of items from one or more sets.

<span id="cryptographic_hash_function">cryptographic hash function</span>
: A [hash function](#hash_function) that produces an apparently-random value for any input.

<span id="csv">CSV</span>
: A text format for tabular data in which each [record](#record) is one row and [fields](#field) are separated by commas. There are many minor variations, particularly around quoting of [strings](#string).

<span id="cycle">cycle</span>
: A path through a [directed graph](#directed_graph) that leads from a [node](#node) back to itself.

## D

<span id="data_engineer">data engineer</span>
: Someone responsible for designing, developing, and maintaining systems for collecting, storing, and analyzing data.

<span id="data_migration">data migration</span>
: The act of moving data from one system or format to another.

<span id="dataframe">dataframe</span>
: A two-dimensional data structure for storing tabular data in memory. Rows represent [records](#record) and columns represent [fields](#field).

<span id="deadlock">deadlock</span>
: A situation in which no one can proceed because everyone is blocked on someone else.

<span id="debugger">debugger</span>
: A program that enables its user to monitor and control another program, typically by [single-stepping](#single_stepping) through its execution or setting [breakpoints](#breakpoint).

<span id="decorator">decorator</span>
: A function A that can be applied to another function B when function B is being defined to change its behavior in some way.

<span id="defensive_programming">defensive programming</span>
: A set of programming practices that assumes mistakes will happen and either reports or corrects them, such as inserting [assertions](#assertion) to report situations that are not ever supposed to occur.

<span id="delayed_construction">delayed construction</span>
: The practice of constructing an object after something that needs it has been constructed rather than before
  See also: lazy_evaluation.

<span id="dependency">dependency (in build)</span>
: Something that a [build target](#build_target) depends on.

<span id="derived_class">derived class</span>
: In [object-oriented programming](#oop), a class that is a direct or indirect extension of a [base class](#base_class)
  See also: child_class.

<span id="design_by_contract">design by contract</span>
: A style of designing software in which functions specify the [pre-conditions](#pre_condition) that must be true in order for them to run and the [post-conditions](#post_condition) they guarantee will be true when they return. A function can then be replaced by one with weaker pre-conditions (i.e., it accepts a wider set of input) and/or stronger post-conditions (i.e., it produces a smaller range of output) without breaking anything else
  See also: liskov_substitution_principle.

<span id="design_pattern">design pattern</span>
: A recurring pattern in software design that is specific enough to be worth naming, but not so specific that a single best implementation can be provided by a [library](#library)
  See also: iterator_pattern, singleton_pattern, template_method_pattern, visitor_pattern.

<span id="dictionary">dictionary</span>
: A data structure that allows items to be looked up by value. Dictionaries are often implemented using [hash tables](#hash_table).

<span id="dictionary_comprehension">dictionary comprehension</span>
: A single expression that constructs a dictionary by looping over key-value pairs
  See also: list_comprehension.

<span id="dag">directed acyclic graph (DAG)</span>
: A [directed graph](#directed_graph) which does not contain any [cycles](#cycle) (i.e., it is not possible to reach a [node](#node) from itself by following edges).

<span id="directed_graph">directed graph</span>
: A [graph](#graph_data) whose [edges](#edge) have directions.

<span id="disassemble">disassemble</span>
: To convert machine instructions into [assembly code](#assembly_code) or some higher-level language.

<span id="disassembler">disassembler</span>
: A program that translates machine instructions into [assembly code](#assembly_code) or some higher-level language
  See also: assembler.

<span id="docstring">docstring</span>
: A string at the start of a module, class, or function in Python that is not assigned to a variable, which is used to hold the documentation for that part of code.

<span id="dom">DOM (DOM)</span>
: A standard, in-memory representation of [HTML](#html) and [XML](#xml). Each [element](#element) is stored as a [node](#node) in a [DOM tree](#dom_tree) with a set of named [attributes](#attribute); contained elements are [child nodes](#child_tree).

<span id="dom_tree">DOM tree</span>
: The [tree](#tree) formed by a set of properly-nested [DOM](#dom) [nodes](#node).

<span id="dns">Domain Name System (DNS)</span>
: A decentralized naming system for computers that translates [hostnames](#hostname) into the [IP address](#ip_address) of particular computers.

<span id="dry_run">dry run</span>
: An execution of a program that doesn't change anything.

<span id="duck_typing">duck typing</span>
: A programming style in which the methods an object happens to have determines how it can be used, rather than what classes it inherits from.

<span id="dynamic_dispatch">dynamic dispatch</span>
: To find a function or a property of an [object](#object) by name while a program is running. For example, instead of getting a specific property of an object using `obj.name`, a program might use `obj[someVariable]`, where `someVariable` could hold `"name"` or some other property name.

<span id="dynamic_scoping">dynamic scoping</span>
: To find the value of a variable by looking at what is on the [call stack](#call_stack) at the moment the lookup is done. Almost all programming languages use [lexical scoping](#lexical_scoping) instead, since it is more predictable.

<span id="dynamic_typing">dynamic typing</span>
: A system in which types are checked as the program is running
  See also: static_typing, type_hint.

## E

<span id="eager_evaluation">eager evaluation</span>
: Evaluating expressions before they are used
  See also: lazy_evaluation.

<span id="easy_mode">easy mode</span>
: A term borrowed from gaming meaning to do something with obstacles or difficulties simplified or removed, often for practice purposes.

<span id="edge">edge</span>
: A connection between two [nodes](#node) in a [graph](#graph_data). An edge may have data associated with it, such as a name or distance.

<span id="element">element (in HTML)</span>
: A named component in an [HTML](#html) or [XML](#xml) document. Elements are usually written `<name>`…`</name>`, where "…" represents the content of the element. Elements often have [attributes](#attribute).

<span id="enumeration">enumeration</span>
: A set of distinct named values defined in a program.

<span id="environment">environment</span>
: The set of variables currently defined in a program.

<span id="error_test">error (result of test)</span>
: Signalled when something goes wrong in a [unit test](#unit_test) itself rather than in the system being tested. In this case, we do not know anything about the correctness of the system.

<span id="error_handling">error handling</span>
: What a program does to detect and correct for errors. Examples include printing a message and using a default configuration if the user-specified configuration cannot be found.

<span id="escape_sequence">escape sequence</span>
: A series of two or more characters used to represent a character that otherwise couldn't be represented. For example, the escape sequence `\"` is used to represent a single `"` character inside a double-quoted string.

<span id="exception">exception</span>
: An object that stores information about an error or other unusual event in a program. One part of a program will create and [raise an exception](#raise_exception) to signal that something unexpected has happened; another part will [catch](#catch_exception) it.

<span id="exclusive_or">exclusive or</span>
: A logical (or bitwise) operator that is true (or 1) if its arguments have different values and false (or 0) if they are the same. Exclusive or implements "either/or" or "one or the other".

<span id="expected_result">expected result (of test)</span>
: The value that a piece of software is supposed to produce when tested in a certain way, or the state in which it is supposed to leave the system.

<span id="exponent">exponent</span>
: The portion of a floating-point number that controls placement of the decimal point
  See also: mantissa.

<span id="expression">expression</span>
: A part of a program that produces a value, such as `1+2`
  See also: statement.

<span id="extensibility">extensibility</span>
: How easily new features can be added to a program or existing features can be changed.

<span id="extract_parent_class_refactoring">Extract Parent Class refactoring</span>
: A [refactoring](#refactor) in which some functionality of an existing class or set of classes is moved into a newly-created [parent class](#parent_class).

## F

<span id="factory_method">factory method</span>
: A [method](#method) whose only job is to construct an object of some type. Factory methods are typically created to make it easier for [child classes](#child_class) to construct objects of other types.

<span id="fail_test">failure (result of test)</span>
: A test fails if the [actual result](#actual_result) does not match the [expected result](#expected_result).

<span id="false_negative">false negative</span>
: A report that something is missing when it is actually present
  See also: false_positive.

<span id="false_positive">false positive</span>
: A report that something is present when it is actually absent
  See also: false_negative.

<span id="falsy">falsy</span>
: Refers to a value that is treated as false in Boolean expressions. In Python, this includes empty strings and lists and the number zero
  See also: truthy.

<span id="field">field</span>
: A component of a [record](#record) containing a single value. Every record in a database [table](#table) has the same fields.

<span id="file_locking">file locking</span>
: The act of restricting updates to a file, or its deletion, so that operations on it appear [atomic](#atomic_operation).

<span id="fixture">fixture</span>
: The thing on which a test is run, such as the [parameters](#parameter) to the function being tested or the file being processed.

<span id="format_string">format string</span>
: A string that contains special markers showing how to format values. For example, the string `"{age:02d} years old"` specifies that the value of `age` is to be inserted at the front of the string and formatted as a 2-digit decimal number with a leading 0 (if necessary).

## G

<span id="garbage_collection">garbage collection</span>
: An automatic process in a program that finds and recycles memory that is no longer being used.

<span id="generic_function">generic function</span>
: A collection of functions with similar purpose, each operating on a different class of data.

<span id="global">global</span>
: Referring to the top or outermost [scope](#scope) a program
  See also: local.

<span id="globbing">globbing</span>
: Matching filenames against patterns. The name comes from an early Unix utility called `glob` (short for "global"). Glob patterns are a subset of [regular expressions](#regular_expression)
  See also: regular_expression.

<span id="grammar">grammar</span>
: The rules that define a formal language recognized by a [parser](#parser).

<span id="graph_data">graph (data structure)</span>
: A data structure in which [nodes](#node) are connected to one another by [edges](#edge)
  See also: tree.

<span id="greedy_matching">greedy matching</span>
: Matching as much as possible while still finding a valid match
  See also: lazy_matching.

## H

<span id="hash_code">hash code</span>
: A value generated by a [hash function](#hash_function). Good hash codes have the same properties as random numbers in order to reduce the frequency of [collisions](#hash_collision).

<span id="hash_function">hash function</span>
: A function that turns arbitrary data into a bit array, or a [key](#key), of a fixed size. Hash functions are used to determine where data should be stored in a [hash table](#hash_table).

<span id="hash_table">hash table</span>
: A data structure that calculates a pseudo-random key (location) for each value passed to it and stores the value in that location. Hash tables enable fast lookup for arbitrary data. This occurs at the cost of extra memory because hash tables must always be larger than the amount of information they need to store, to avoid the possibility of data collisions, when the hash function returns the same key for two different values.

<span id="http_header">header (of HTTP request or response)</span>
: A name-value pair at the start of an [HTTP request](#http_request) or [response](#http_response). Headers are used to specify what data formats the sender can handle, the date and time the message was sent, and so on.

<span id="headless">headless application</span>
: An application run without its usual graphical interface.  Browsers, editors, and other applications are often run headless for testing purposes.

<span id="helper_class">helper class</span>
: A [class](#class) created to support another class that has no other purpose on its own.

<span id="helper_function">helper function</span>
: A function created to support another function (or functions) that has no other use on its own.

<span id="helper_method">helper method</span>
: A [method](#method) designed to be used only by other methods in the same [class](#class).  Helper methods are usually created to keep other methods short and readable.

<span id="heterogeneous">heterogeneous</span>
: Containing mixed data types. For example, an array in Javascript can contain a mix of numbers, character strings, and values of other types
  See also: homogeneous.

<span id="hexadecimal">hexadecimal</span>
: A base-16 numerical representation that uses the letters A-F (or a-f) to represent the values from 10 to 15.

<span id="homogeneous">homogeneous</span>
: Containing a single data type. For example, a [vector](#vector) must be homogeneous: its values must all be numeric, logical, etc
  See also: heterogeneous.

<span id="hostname">hostname</span>
: The human-readable name for a networked computer, such as `example.com`.

<span id="html">HTML</span>
: The standard [markup language](#markup_language) used for web pages. HTML is represented in memory using [DOM](#dom) (Digital Object Model)
  See also: xml.

<span id="http">HTTP</span>
: The protocol used to exchange information between browsers and websites, and more generally between other clients and servers. Communication consists of [requests](#http_request) and [responses](#http_response).

<span id="http_method">HTTP method</span>
: The verb in an [HTTP request](#http_request) that defines what the [client](#client) wants to do. Common methods are `GET` (to get data) and `POST` (to submit data).

<span id="http_protocol_version">HTTP protocol version</span>
: Specifies the version of [HTTP](#http) being used, which in turn defines what headers can appear, how they are to be interpreted, etc.

<span id="http_request">HTTP request</span>
: A precisely-formatted block of text sent from a [client](#client) such as a browser to a [server](#server) that specifies what resource is being requested, what data formats the client will accept, etc.

<span id="http_response">HTTP response</span>
: A precisely-formatted block of text sent from a [server](#server) back to a [client](#client) in reply to a [request](#http_request).

<span id="http_status_code">HTTP status code</span>
: A numerical code that indicates what happened when an [HTTP request](#http_request) was processed, such as 200 (OK), 404 (not found), or 500 (internal server error).

## I

<span id="immutable">immutable</span>
: Data that cannot be changed after being created. Immutable data is easier to think about, particularly if data structures are shared between several tasks, but may result in higher memory requirements.

<span id="index_database">index (a database)</span>
: An auxiliary data structure in a database used to speed up search for some entries. An index increases memory and disk requirements but reduces search time.

<span id="infinite_loop">infinite loop</span>
: A loop (usually a `while` loop) that never ends because its controlling condition is never false
  See also: infinite_recursion.

<span id="infinite_recursion">infinite recursion</span>
: [Recursion](#recursion) that never stops because it never reaches a case that doesn't require further evaluation; the recursive equivalent of an [infinite loop](#infinite_loop).

<span id="infix_notation">infix notation</span>
: Writing expressions with operators between operands, as in `1 + 2` to add 1 and 2
  See also: prefix_notation, postfix_notation.

<span id="inheritance">inheritance</span>
: The act of creating a new [class](#class) from an existing class, typically by adding or changing its properties or [methods](#method)
  See also: multiple_inheritance.

<span id="instance">instance</span>
: An [object](#object) of a particular [class](#class).

<span id="instruction_pointer">instruction pointer</span>
: A special [register](#register_hardware) in a processor that stores the address of the next instruction to execute.

<span id="instruction_set">instruction set</span>
: The basic operations that a particular processor can execute directly.

<span id="internet_protocol">Internet Protocol (IP)</span>
: A set of specifications for ways computers can communicate. [TCP/IP](#tcp) is the most widely used.

<span id="interpreted_language">interpreted language</span>
: A high-level language that is not executed directly by the computer, but instead is run by an [interpreter](#interpreter) that translates program instructions into machine commands on the fly.

<span id="interpreter">interpreter</span>
: A program that runs programs written in a high-level [interpreted language](#interpreted_language). Interpreters can run interactively but may also execute commands saved in a file.

<span id="intrinsic_complexity">intrinsic complexity</span>
: The inherent difficult of a problem. The term is used in contrast to [accidental complexity](#accidental_complexity).

<span id="introspection">introspection</span>
: See [reflection](#reflection).

<span id="ip_address">IP address (IP)</span>
: A four-part number that uniquely identifies a computer on a network.

<span id="iso_date_format">ISO date format</span>
: An international standard for formatting dates. While the full standard is complex, the most common form is `YYYY-MM-DD`, i.e., a four-digit year, a two-digit month, and a two-digit day, separated by hyphens.

<span id="iterator">iterator</span>
: A function or object that produces each value from a collection in turn for processing.

<span id="iterator_pattern">Iterator pattern</span>
: A [design pattern](#design_pattern) that uses [iterators](#iterator) to hide the differences between different kinds of data structures so that everything can be processed using loops
  See also: visitor_pattern.

## J

<span id="join">join (tables)</span>
: An operation that combines two [tables](#table), typically by matching [keys](#key) from one with keys from another.

<span id="json">JSON</span>
: A way to represent data by combining basic values like numbers and character strings in [lists](#list) and [key-value](#dictionary) structures. The acronym stands for "JavaScript Object Notation"; unlike better-defined standards like [XML](#xml), it is unencumbered by a syntax for comments or ways to define a [schema](#schema).

## K

<span id="key">key</span>
: A [field](#field) or combination of fields whose value(s) uniquely identify a [record](#record) within a [table](#table) or dataset. Keys are often used to select specific records and in [joins](#join).

<span id="key_value_store">key-value store</span>
: A simple form of database in which each [record](#record) can only be accessed by a single [key](#key).

## L

<span id="label_address">label (of address in memory)</span>
: A human-readable name given to a particular location in memory when writing programs in [assembly code](#assembly_code).

<span id="lambda_expression">lambda expression</span>
: An expression that takes zero or more parameters and produces a result. A lambda expression is sometimes called an [anonymous function](#anonymous_function); the name comes from the mathematical symbol λ used to represent such expressions.

<span id="layout_engine">layout engine</span>
: A piece of software that decides where to place text, images, and other elements on a page.

<span id="lazy_evaluation">lazy evaluation</span>
: Evaluating expressions only when absolutely necessary
  See also: eager_evaluation.

<span id="lazy_matching">lazy matching</span>
: Matching as little as possible while still finding a valid match
  See also: greedy_matching.

<span id="lexical_scoping">lexical scoping</span>
: To look up the value associated with a name according to the textual structure of a program. Most programming languages use lexical scoping instead of [dynamic scoping](#dynamic_scoping) because the latter is less predictable.

<span id="library">library</span>
: An installable collection of software, also often called a [module](#module) or [package](#package).

<span id="link">link (a program)</span>
: To combine separately [compiled](#compiled_language) modules into a single runnable program.

<span id="linter">linter</span>
: A program that checks for common problems in software, such as violations of indentation rules or variable naming conventions. The name comes from the first tool of its kind, called `lint`.

<span id="liskov_substitution_principle">Liskov Substitution Principle</span>
: A design rule stating that it should be possible to replace objects in a program with objects of derived classes without breaking the program. [Design by contract](#design_by_contract) is intended to enforce this rule.

<span id="list">list</span>
: A [vector](#vector) that can contain values of many different ([heterogeneous](#heterogeneous)) types.

<span id="list_comprehension">list comprehension</span>
: A single expression that constructs a list by looping over its items.

<span id="literal">literal (in parsing)</span>
: A representation of a fixed value in a program, such as the digits `123` for the number 123 or the characters `"abc"` for the string containing those three letters.

<span id="little_endian">little endian</span>
: A storage scheme in which the most significant part of a number is stored in the byte with the highest address. For example, the 16-bit big-endian representation of 258 stores 0x02 in the lower byte and 0x01 in the higher byte
  See also: big_endian.

<span id="local">local</span>
: Referring to the current or innermost [scope](#scope) in a program
  See also: global.

<span id="log_file">log file</span>
: A file to which a program writes status or debugging information for later analysis.

<span id="log_structured_db">log-structured database</span>
: A database to which data can only be appended, i.e., existing records cannot be overwritten.

## M

<span id="manifest">manifest</span>
: A list of something's parts or components.

<span id="mantissa">mantissa</span>
: The portion of a floating-point number that defines its specific value
  See also: exponent.

<span id="markdown">Markdown</span>
: A [markup language](#markup_language) with a simple syntax intended as a replacement for [HTML](#html).

<span id="markup_language">markup language</span>
: A set of rules for annotating text to define its meaning or how it should be displayed. The markup is usually not displayed, but instead controls how the underlying text is interpreted or shown. [Markdown](#markdown) and [HTML](#html) are widely-used markup languages for web pages
  See also: xml.

<span id="metadata">metadata</span>
: Data about data, such as the time a dataset was archived.

<span id="method">method</span>
: An implementation of a [generic function](#generic_function) that handles objects of a specific class.

<span id="method_injection">method injection</span>
: To add methods to an existing class after its definition.

<span id="minimum_testable_class">minimum testable class</span>
: The simplest extension to an [abstract class](#abstract_class) that can actually be used, particularly in tests.

<span id="mixin_class">mixin class</span>
: A class that is not meant to be instantiated itself but which contains methods to be added to other classes (typically via [multiple inheritance](#multiple_inheritance)).

<span id="mock_object">mock object</span>
: A simplified replacement for part of a program whose behavior is easy to control and predict. Mock objects are used in [unit tests](#unit_test) to simulate databases, web services, and other complex systems.

<span id="model">model</span>
: A set of values for variables that satisfies a specific set of constraints.

<span id="module">module</span>
: A reusable software [package](#package), also often called a [library](#library).

<span id="monkey_patching">monkey patching</span>
: To replace [methods](#method) in a [class](#class) or [object](#object) at run-time without modifying the original code.

<span id="multiple_inheritance">multiple inheritance</span>
: Inheriting from two or more classes when creating a new class.

## N

<span id="name_collision">name collision</span>
: A situation in which two or more things are trying to use the same name at the same time or in the same [scope](#scope).

<span id="named_tuple">named tuple</span>
: A tuple whose fields can be accessed by name as well as by location. Named tuples are used to implement records that don't have any associated [methods](#method).

<span id="node">node</span>
: An element of a [graph](#graph_data) that is connected to other nodes by [edges](#edge). Nodes typically have data associated with them, such as names or weights.

<span id="null_byte">null byte</span>
: A byte with the value zero. Null bytes are used to mark the ends of strings in C and C++, and are sometimes used to fill unused space in fixed-size binary records.

<span id="null_object_pattern">Null Object pattern</span>
: A [design pattern](#design_pattern) in which a placeholder object is used instead of `None`. The placeholder object has the methods of the object usually used, but those methods do nothing. This pattern saves other code from having to check repeatedly for `None`.

<span id="nybble">nybble</span>
: Four bits, i.e., half a byte.

## O

<span id="object">object</span>
: In [object-oriented programming](#oop), a structure that contains the data for a specific instance of a [class](#class). The operations the object is capable of are defined by the class's [methods](#method).

<span id="oop">object-oriented programming (OOP)</span>
: A style of programming in which functions and data are bound together in [objects](#object) that only interact with each other through well-defined interfaces.

<span id="orm">object-relational mapper (ORM)</span>
: A [library](#library) that converts [objects](#object) in memory to [records](#record) in a [relational database](#relational_database) and vice versa.

<span id="off_by_one_error">off-by-one error</span>
: A common error in programming in which the program refers to element `i` of a structure when it should refer to element `i-1` or `i+1`, or processes `N` elements when it should process `N-1` or `N+1`.

<span id="olap">online analytical processing (OLAP)</span>
: Analyzing data in bulk. The term is used in contrast to [OLTP](#oltp).

<span id="oltp">online transaction processing (OLTP)</span>
: Adding records to a database or querying individual records. The term is used in contrast to [OLAP](#olap).

<span id="op_code">op code</span>
: The numerical operation code for an instruction that a processor can execute.

<span id="open_closed_principle">Open-Closed Principle</span>
: A design rule stating that software should be open for extension but closed for modification, i.e., it should be possible to extend functionality without having to rewrite existing code.

<span id="tag_opening">opening tag</span>
: The textual marker showing the start of an [element](#element) in an HTML document, written `&lt;tag&gt;`. An opening tag may contain [attributes](#attribute).

<span id="operator_overloading">operator overloading</span>
: Defining or redefining the implementation of built-in operators like `+`.

## P

<span id="package">package</span>
: A collection of code, data, and documentation that can be distributed and re-used. Also referred to in some languages as a [library](#library) or [module](#module).

<span id="page">page</span>
: A fixed-size block of storage space. Most modern filesystems manage disks using 4K pages, and many other applications such as databases use the same page size to maximize efficiency.

<span id="parameter">parameter</span>
: The name that a function gives to one of the values passed to it when it is called
  See also: argument.

<span id="parameter_sweeping">parameter sweeping</span>
: To execute a program multiple times with different parameters to find out how its behavior or performance depends on those parameters.

<span id="parent_tree">parent (in a tree)</span>
: A [node](#node) in a [tree](#node) that is above another node (called a [child](#child_tree)). Every node in a tree except the [root node](#root_tree) has a single parent.

<span id="parent_class">parent class</span>
: In [object-oriented programming](#oop), the [class](#class) from which a subclass (called the [child class](#child_class)) is derived.

<span id="parser">parser</span>
: A function or program that reads text formatted according to some [grammar](#grammar) and converts it to a data structure in memory. Every programming language has a parser that reads programs written in that language; parsers also exist for various data formats.

<span id="pass_test">pass (result of test)</span>
: A test passes if the [actual result](#actual_result) matches the [expected result](#expected_result).

<span id="patch">patch</span>
: A single file containing a set of changes to a set of files, separated by markers that indicate where each individual change should be applied, or the [semantic versioning](#semantic_versioning) identifier for such a file.

<span id="path_resolution">path resolution</span>
: The process of converting the filename portion of a [URL](#url) into a specific file on disk.

<span id="persistence">persistence</span>
: The act of saving and restoring data, particularly [heterogeneous](#heterogeneous) data with irregular structure.

<span id="phony_target">phony target</span>
: A [build recipe](#build_recipe) that doesn't update any files. Phony targets are typically used to make tasks such as running tests reproducible.

<span id="pipe_shell">pipe (in the Unix shell)</span>
: The `|` used to make the output of one command the input of the next.

<span id="placeholder_file">placeholder file</span>
: A file stored in place of some other file (such as a large dataset) that contains [metadata](#metadata) about that other file.

<span id="polymorphism">polymorphism</span>
: Having many different implementations of the same interface. If a set of functions or objects are polymorphic, they can be called interchangeably.

<span id="port">port</span>
: A logical endpoint for communication, like a phone number in an office building. Only one program on a computer may use a particular port on that computer at any time.

<span id="post_condition">post-condition</span>
: Something that is guaranteed to be true after a function runs successfully. Post-conditions are often expressed as [assertions](#assertion) that are guaranteed to be true of a function's results
  See also: design_by_contract, pre_condition.

<span id="postfix_notation">postfix notation</span>
: Writing expressions with the operator after the operand, as in `2 3 +` to add 2 and 3
  See also: infix_notation, prefix_notation.

<span id="pre_condition">pre-condition</span>
: Something that must be true before a function runs in order for it to work correctly. Pre-conditions are often expressed as [assertions](#assertion) that must be true of a function's inputs in order for it to run successfully
  See also: design_by_contract, post_condition.

<span id="prefix_notation">prefix notation</span>
: Writing expressions with the operator in front of the operand, as in `+ 3 4` to add 3 and 4
  See also: infix_notation, postfix_notation.

<span id="prerequisite">prerequisite</span>
: Something that a [build target](#build_target) depends on
  See also: dependency.

<span id="pretty_print">pretty print</span>
: To format textual output in a way that makes it easier to read.

<span id="profiler">profiler</span>
: A tool that measures one or more aspects of a program's performance.

<span id="profiling">profiling</span>
: The act of measuring where a program spends its time, which operations consume memory or disk space, etc
  See also: profiler.

<span id="protocol">protocol</span>
: A set of rules that something promises to obey, i.e., the contract between that thing and its users.

<span id="pythonic">Pythonic</span>
: Conforming to common Python programming style and practices.

## Q

<span id="query_parameter">query parameter</span>
: A key-value pair appended to the path portion of a [URL](#url).

## R

<span id="race_condition">race condition</span>
: A situation in which a result depends on the order in which two or more concurrent operations are carried out.

<span id="raise_exception">raise (an exception)</span>
: To signal that something unexpected or unusual has happened in a program by creating an [exception](#exception) and handing it to the [error-handling](#error_handling) system, which then tries to find a point in the program that will [catch](#catch_exception) it
  See also: throw_exception.

<span id="record">record</span>
: A group of related values that are stored together. A record may be represented as a [tuple](#tuple) or as a row in a [table](#table); in the latter case, every record in the table has the same [fields](#field).

<span id="recursion">recursion</span>
: To define something in terms of itself, or the act of a function invoking itself (directly or indirectly).

<span id="recursive_enumeration_pattern">Recursive Enumeration pattern</span>
: A [design pattern](#design_pattern) that generates the [cross product](#cross_product) of a set of items using recursive function calls. Each level of recursion adds items from one more set of possibilities to an [accumulator](#accumulator).

<span id="refactor">refactor</span>
: To rewrite existing code in order to make it simpler or more efficient without changing its functionality.

<span id="reflection">reflection</span>
: To inspect the properties of a running program in a generic way. Reflection relies on the fact that a program is just another data structure.

<span id="register_code">register (in code)</span>
: To add a function, class, or other object to a lookup table for later use.

<span id="register_hardware">register (in hardware)</span>
: A small piece of memory (typically one [word](#word_memory) long) built into a processor that operations can refer to directly.

<span id="regular_expression">regular expression</span>
: A pattern for matching text, written as text itself. Regular expressions are sometimes called "regexp", "regex", or "RE", and are powerful tools for working with text.

<span id="relational_database">relational database</span>
: A database that organizes information into [tables](#table), each of which has a fixed set of named [fields](#field) (shown as columns) and a variable number of [records](#record) (shown as rows)
  See also: sql.

<span id="relative_error">relative error</span>
: The absolute value of the difference between the actual and correct value divided by the correct value. For example, if the actual value is 9 and the correct value is 10, the relative error is 0.1. Relative error is usually more useful than [absolute error](#absolute_error).

<span id="reverse_lookup">reverse lookup</span>
: To find the key associated with a particular value in a table.

<span id="root_tree">root (in a tree)</span>
: The [node](#node) in a [tree](#tree) of which all other nodes are direct or indirect [children](#child_tree), or equivalently the only node in the tree that has no [parent](#parent_tree).

<span id="row_wise">row-wise storage</span>
: To organize the memory of a two-dimensional table so that the values in each row are laid out in contiguous blocks
  See also: column_wise.

<span id="runtime">runtime</span>
: A program that implements the basic operations used in a programming language.

## S

<span id="schema">schema</span>
: A specification of the format of a dataset, including the name, format, and content of each [table](#table).

<span id="scope">scope</span>
: A region of a program in which names can be defined without colliding with definitions in other parts of the program. In Python, each [module](#module) and function creates a new scope.

<span id="scoring_function">scoring function</span>
: A function that measures how good a solution to a problem is.

<span id="search_space">search space</span>
: The set of all possible solutions to a problem, i.e., the set of possibilities that an algorithm must search through to find an answer.

<span id="tag_self_closing">self-closing tag</span>
: A textual marker representing an [element](#element) in an HTML document that has no content, written `&lt;tag/&gt;`. A self-closing tag may contain [attributes](#attribute).

<span id="semantic_versioning">semantic versioning</span>
: A standard for identifying software releases. In the version identifier `major.minor.patch`, `major` changes when a new version of software is incompatible with old versions, `minor` changes when new features are added to an existing version, and `patch` changes when small bugs are fixed.

<span id="server">server</span>
: A program that waits for requests from [clients](#client) and sends them data in response.

<span id="sha256">SHA-256 (hash function)</span>
: A [cryptographic hash function](#cryptographic_hash_function) that produces a 256-bit output.

<span id="sign_magnitude">sign and magnitude</span>
: A binary representation of integers in which one bit indicates whether the value is positive or negative and the remaining bits indicate its magnitude
  See also: twos_complement.

<span id="signature">signature</span>
: The ordered list of parameters and return values that specifies how a function must be called and what it returns.

<span id="single_stepping">single stepping</span>
: To step through a program one line or instruction at a time.

<span id="singleton">singleton</span>
: A set with only one element, or a [class](#class) with only one [instance](#instance)
  See also: singleton_pattern.

<span id="singleton_pattern">Singleton pattern</span>
: A [design pattern](#design_pattern) that creates a [singleton](#singleton) [object](#object) to manage some resource or service, such as a database or [cache](#cache). In [object-oriented programming](#oop), the pattern is usually implemented by hiding the [constructor](#constructor) of the [class](#class) in some way so that it can only be called once.

<span id="socket">socket</span>
: A communication channel between two computers that provides an interface similar to reading and writing files.

<span id="space_complexity">space complexity</span>
: The way the memory required by an algorithm grows as a function of the problem size, usually expressed using [big-oh notation](#big_oh)
  See also: time_complexity.

<span id="spread">spread</span>
: To automatically match the values from a list or dictionary supplied by the caller to the parameters of a function.

<span id="sql">SQL</span>
: The language used for writing queries for a [relational database](#relational_database). The term was originally an acronym for Structured Query Language.

<span id="stable_sort">stable sort</span>
: A sorting algorithm that preserves the original order of items that are considered equal.

<span id="stack_frame">stack frame</span>
: A section of the [call stack](#call_stack) that records details of a single call to a specific function.

<span id="build_stale">stale (in build)</span>
: To be out-of-date compared to a [prerequisite](#prerequisite). A [build manager](#build_manager) finds and updates things that are stale.

<span id="stderr">standard error</span>
: A predefined communication channel typically used to report errors
  See also: stdin, stdout.

<span id="stdin">standard input</span>
: A predefined communication channel typically used to read input from the keyboard or from the previous process in a [pipe](#pipe_shell)
  See also: stderr, stdout.

<span id="stdout">standard output</span>
: A predefined communication channel typically used to send output to the screen or to the next process in a [pipe](#pipe_shell)
  See also: stderr, stdin.

<span id="statement">statement</span>
: A part of a program that doesn't produce a value. `for` loops and `if` statements are statements in Python
  See also: expression.

<span id="static_method">static method</span>
: A function that is defined within a class but does not require either the class itself or an instance of the class as a parameter
  See also: class_method.

<span id="static_site_generator">static site generator (SSG)</span>
: A software tool that creates HTML pages from templates and content.

<span id="static_typing">static typing</span>
: A system in which the types of values are checked as code is being [compiled](#compiled_language)
  See also: dynamic_typing, type_hint.

<span id="stream">stream</span>
: A sequence of bytes or other data of variable length that can only be processed in sequential order.

<span id="streaming_api">streaming API</span>
: An [API](#api) that processes data in chunks rather than needing to have all of it in memory at once. Streaming APIs usually require handlers for events such as "start of data", "next block", and "end of data".

<span id="string">string</span>
: A block of text in a program. The term is short for "character string".

<span id="successive_refinement">successive refinement</span>
: See [top-down design](#top_down_design).

<span id="synthetic_data">synthetic data</span>
: Made-up data that has the same significant characteristics as real data, typically created for testing.

## T

<span id="table">table</span>
: A set of [records](#record) in a [relational database](#relational_database) or [dataframe](#dataframe).

<span id="tag">tag (in HTML)</span>
: The textual marker showing the start and/or end of an [element](#element) in an HTML document
  See also: tag_closing, tag_opening, tag_self_closing.

<span id="build_target">target (in build)</span>
: The file(s) that a [build rule](#build_rule) will update if they are out-of-date compared to their [dependencies](#dependency).

<span id="technical_debt">technical debt</span>
: The work that will be required in the future because of limited quick-fix solutions or unaddressed complexity today.

<span id="template_method_pattern">Template Method pattern</span>
: A [design pattern](#design_pattern) in which a [parent class](#parent_class) defines an overall sequence of operations by calling [abstract methods](#abstract_method) that [child classes](#child_class) must then implement. Each child class then behaves in the same general way, but implements the steps differently.

<span id="tf_idf">term frequency - inverse document frequency (TF-IDF)</span>
: A formula used to rank documents when searching that assigns a score based on how often a word occurs overall and how specific it is to a particular document.

<span id="test_fidelity">test fidelity</span>
: The degree to which a [mock object](#mock_object) or other replacement for part or all of a system mimics the behavior of that system for testing purposes.

<span id="tdd">test-driven development</span>
: The practice of writing tests before writing the code to be tested. Research shows that the order doesn't actually make a difference; what does is alternating in short bursts between testing and coding.

<span id="text_mode">text mode</span>
: An option for reading or writing files in which bytes are translated to or from characters and end-of-line markers are normalized. The term is used in contrast with [binary mode](#binary_mode).

<span id="throw_exception">throw exception</span>
: Another term for [raising](#raise_exception) an exception.

<span id="throw_low_catch_high">throw low, catch high</span>
: A widely-used pattern for managing [exceptions](#exception) whereby they are [raised](#raise_exception) in many places at low levels of a program but [caught](#catch_exception) in a few high-level places where corrective action can be taken.

<span id="time_complexity">time complexity</span>
: The way the running time of an algorithm grows as a function of the problem size, usually expressed using [big-oh notation](#big_oh)
  See also: space_complexity.

<span id="toctou">time of check - time of use</span>
: A [race condition](#race_condition) in which a process checks the state of something and then operates on it, but some other process might alter that state between the check and the operation.

<span id="timestamp">timestamp</span>
: A digital identifier showing the time at which something was created or accessed. Timestamps should use [ISO date format](#iso_date_format) for portability.

<span id="token">token</span>
: An indivisible unit of text for a parser, such as a variable name or a number. Exactly what constitutes a token depends on the language.

<span id="tokenizer">tokenizer</span>
: A piece of software that groups individual characters together into meaningful [tokens](#token).

<span id="top_down_design">top-down design</span>
: In software design, the practice of writing the more abstract or higher-level parts of the program first, then filling in the details layer by layer. In practice, programmers almost always modify the upper levels as they work on the lower levels, but high-level changes become less common as more of the details are filled in
  See also: successive_refinement.

<span id="topological_order">topological order</span>
: Any ordering of the [nodes](#node) in a [graph](#graph_data) that respects the direction of its [edges](#edge), i.e., if there is an edge from node A to node B, A comes before B in the ordering. There may be many topological orderings of a particular graph.

<span id="tcp">Transmission Control Protocol (TCP/IP)</span>
: The most popular member of the [IP](#internet_protocol) family of protocols. TCP/IP tries to deliver messages reliably and in order so that programs can communicate as if they were reading and writing files.

<span id="tree">tree</span>
: A [graph](#graph_data) in which every node except the [root](#root_tree) has exactly one [parent](#parent_tree).

<span id="truthy">truthy</span>
: Refers to a value that is treated as true in Boolean expressions. In Python, this includes non-empty strings and lists and numbers other than zero
  See also: falsy.

<span id="tuple">tuple</span>
: A value that has a fixed number of parts, such as the three color components of a red-green-blue color specification.

<span id="two_hard_problems">two hard problems in computer science</span>
: Refers to a quote by Phil Karlton: "There are only two hard problems in computer science—cache invalidation and naming things." Many variations add a third problem as a joke, such as [off-by-one errors](#off_by_one_error).

<span id="twos_complement">two's complement</span>
: A binary representation of integers that "rolls over" like an odometer to represent negative values
  See also: sign_magnitude.

<span id="type_hint">type hint</span>
: Extra information added to a program to indicate what data type or types a variable is supposed to have. Type hints are a compromise between [static typing](#static_typing) and [dynamic typing](#dynamic_typing).

## U

<span id="unicode">Unicode</span>
: A standard that defines numeric codes for many thousands of characters and symbols. Unicode does not define how those numbers are stored; that is done by standards like [UTF-8](#utf_8).

<span id="unit_test">unit test</span>
: A test that exercises one function or feature of a piece of software and produces [pass](#pass_test), [fail](#fail_test), or [error](#error_test).

<span id="url">Universal Resource Locator (URL)</span>
: A multi-part identifier that specifies something on a computer network. A URL may contain a protocol (such as `http`), a [hostname](#hostname) such as `example.com`, a [port](#port) (such as 80), a path (such as `/homepage.html`), and various other things.

<span id="unparsing">unparsing</span>
: The act of turning the data structure generated by a [parser](#parser) back into program text.

<span id="upcall">upcall</span>
: The act of explicitly invoking a method of a [parent class](#parent_class) from inside a [child class](#child_class). A method in a child class may upcall to the corresponding method in the parent class as part of extending that method.

<span id="utf_32">UTF-32</span>
: A way to store the numeric codes representing [Unicode](#unicode) characters in which every character is stored as a 32-bit integer.

<span id="utf_8">UTF-8</span>
: A way to store the numeric codes representing [Unicode](#unicode) characters that is [backward-compatible](#backward_compatible) with the older [ASCII](#ascii) standard.

## V

<span id="varargs">varargs</span>
: Short for "variable arguments", a mechanism that captures any "extra" arguments to a function or method.

<span id="variable_capture">variable capture</span>
: The process by which a [closure](#closure) "remembers" the variables that were in scope when it was created.

<span id="variable_length_encoding">variable-length encoding</span>
: Any technique for representing data in which a single logical unit of data may be represented by a variable number of bits or bytes.

<span id="vector">vector</span>
: A sequence of values, usually of [homogeneous](#homogeneous) type.

<span id="version_control_system">version control system</span>
: A system for managing changes made to software during its development.

<span id="viewport">viewport</span>
: A [class](#class) or other data structure whose purpose is to keep track of what can currently be seen by the user.

<span id="virtual_machine">virtual machine</span>
: A program that pretends to be a computer. This may seem a bit redundant, but VMs are quick to create and start up, and changes made inside the virtual machine are contained within that VM so we can install new [packages](#package) or run a completely different operating system without affecting the underlying computer.

<span id="visitor_pattern">Visitor pattern</span>
: A [design pattern](#design_pattern) in which the operation to be done is taken to each element of a data structure in turn. It is usually implemented by having a generator "visitor" that knows how to reach the structure's elements, which is given a function or method to call for each in turn, and that carries out the specific operation
  See also: iterator_pattern.

## W

<span id="watchpoint">watchpoint</span>
: A location or variable being monitored by a debugger. If the value at that location or in that variable changes, the debugger halts and gives the user a chance to inspect the program.

<span id="word_memory">word (of memory)</span>
: The unit of memory that a particular processor most naturally works with. While a byte is a fixed size (8 bits), a word may be 16, 32, or 64 bits long depending on the processor.

## X

<span id="xml">XML</span>
: A set of rules for defining [HTML](#html)-like tags and using them to format documents (typically data). XML was popular in the early 2000s, but its complexity led many programmers to adopt [JSON](#json), instead.

## Y

<span id="yaml">YAML</span>
: A way to represent nested data using indentation rather than the parentheses and commas of [JSON](#json). YAML is often used in configuration files and to define [parameters](#parameter) for various flavors of [Markdown](#markdown) documents.

## Z

<span id="z_buffering">z-buffering</span>
: A drawing method that keeps track of the depth of what lies "under" each pixel so that it displays whatever is nearest to the observer.
