src/parse/index.md, before:

---
abstract: >
    A parser turns text that's easy for a human being to read
    into a data structure that a computer can work with.
    The complete parser for a language like Python can be very complex,
    but this chapter illustrates the key ideas
    by building a parser for the simple filename matching patterns
    implemented in the previous chapter.
syllabus:
-   Parsing transforms text that's easy for people to read into objects that are easy for computers to work with.
-   A grammar defines the textual patterns that a parser recognizes.
-   Most parsers tokenize input text and then analyze the tokens.
-   Most parsers need to implement some form of precedence to prioritize different patterns.
-   Operations like addition and function call work just like user-defined functions.
-   Programs can overload built-in operators by defining specially-named methods
    that are recognized by the compiler or interpreter.
depends:
-   glob
---

We constructed objects to match patterns in [%x glob %],
but an [%i "expression" %] like `"2023-*{pdf,txt}"`
is a lot easier to read and write
than code like `Lit("2023-", Any(Either("pdf", "txt")))`.
If we want to use the former,
we need a [%g parser "parser" %]
to convert those human-readable strings into machine-comprehensible objects.

[%t parse-grammar %] shows the [%g grammar "grammar" %] our parser will handle.
When we are done,
our parser should be able to recognize that `2023-*.{pdf,txt}` means
the [%i "literal" %] `2023-`,
any characters,
a literal `.`,
and then either a literal `pdf` or a literal `txt`.

<div class="table" id="parse-grammar" caption="Glob grammar." markdown="1">
| Meaning                   | Character       |
| ------------------------- | --------------- |
| Any literal character *c* | *c*             |
| Zero or more characters   | `*`             |
| Alternatives              | `{`*x*`,`*y*`}` |
</div>

<div class="callout" markdown="1">

### Please Don't Write Parsers

Languages that are comfortable for people to read and write
are usually difficult for computers to understand
and vice versa,
so we need parsers to translate the former into the latter.
However,
the world doesn't need more file formats:
please use [%g csv "CSV" %], [%g json "JSON" %], [%g yaml "YAML" %],
or something else that already has an acronym
rather than inventing something of your own.

</div>

## Tokenizing {: #parse-token}

Most parsers are written in two parts ([%f parse-pipeline %]).
The first stage groups characters into atoms of text called "[%g token "tokens" %]",
which are meaningful pieces of text
like the digits making up a number or the letters making up a variable name.
Our grammar's tokens are the special characters `,`, `{`, `}`, and `*`.
Any sequence of one or more other characters is a single multi-letter token.
This classification determines the design of our [%g tokenizer "tokenizer" %]:

1.  If a character is not special then
    append it to the current literal (if there is one)
    or start a new literal (if there isn't).

1.  If a character *is* special then
    close the existing literal (if there is one)
    and create a token for the special character.
    Note that the `,` character closes a literal but doesn't produce a token.

[% figure
   slug="parse-pipeline"
   img="pipeline.svg"
   alt="Parsing pipeline"
   caption="Stages in parsing pipeline."
%]

The result of tokenization is a flat list of tokens.
The second stage of parsing assembles tokens to create
an [%g abstract_syntax_tree "abstract syntax tree" %] (AST)
that represents the structure of what was parsed.
We will re-use the classes defined in [%x glob %] for this purpose.

Before we start writing our tokenizer
we have to decide whether to implement it as a set of functions
or as one or more classes.
Based on previous experience we choose the latter:
this tokenizer is simple enough that we'll only need a handful of functions,
but one capable of handling a language like Python would be much larger,
and classes are a handy way to group related functions together.

The main method of our tokenizer looks like this:

[% inc file="tokenizer.py" keep="tok" %]

This method calls `self._setup()` at the start
so that the tokenizer can be re-used.
It *doesn't* call `self._add()` for regular characters;
instead,
it creates a `Lit` entry when it encounters a special character
(i.e., when the current literal ends)
and after all the input has been parsed
(to capture the last literal).

The method `self._add` adds the current thing to the list of tokens.
As a special case,
`self._add(None)` means "add the literal but nothing else"
([%f parse-tokenize %]):

[% inc file="tokenizer.py" keep="add" %]

[% figure
   slug="parse-tokenize"
   img="tokenize.svg"
   alt="Tokenizing"
   caption="Steps in tokenizing a string."
%]

Finally,
we work backward to initialize the tokenizer when we construct it
and to define the set of characters that make up literals:

[% inc file="tokenizer.py" keep="class" %]

<div class="callout" markdown="1">

### A Simple Constant

The code fragment above defines `CHARS` to be
a set containing ASCII letters and digits.
We use a set for speed:
if we used a list,
Python would have to search through it each time we wanted to check a character,
but finding something in a set is much faster.
[%x binary %] will explain why the word "ASCII" appears in
`string` library's definition of characters,
but using it and `string.digits` greatly reduces the chances of us
typing `"abcdeghi…yz"` rather than `"abcdefghi…yz"`.
(The fact that it took you a moment to spot the missing letter 'f'
proves this point.)

</div>

We can now write a few tests to check that
the tokenizer is producing a list of lists
in which each sub-list represents a single token:

<div class="pagebreak"></div>

[% inc file="test_tokenizer.py" keep="tests" %]

## Parsing {: #parse-parse}

We now need to turn the list of tokens into a tree.
Just as we used a class for tokenizing,
we will create one for parsing
and give it a `_parse` method to start things off.
This method doesn't do any conversion itself.
Instead,
it takes a token off the front of the list
and figures out which method handles tokens of that kind:

[% inc file="parser.py" keep="parse" %]

The handlers for `Any` and `Lit` are straightforward:

[% inc file="parser.py" keep="simple" %]

`Either` is a little messier.
We didn't save the commas,
so we'll just pull two tokens and store them
after checking to make sure that we actually *have* two tokens:

[% inc file="parser.py" keep="either" %]

An alternative approach is to take tokens from the list
until we see an `EitherEnd` marker:

[% inc file="better_parser.py" keep="either" %]

This achieves the same thing in the two-token case,
but allows us to write alternatives with more options
without changing the code
(assuming you solved the "Multiple Alternatives" exercise in [%x glob %]).
Tests confirm that we're on the right track:

[% inc file="test_parser.py" keep="sample" %]

This test assumes we can compare `Match` objects using `==`,
just as we would compare numbers or strings.
so we add a `__eq__` method to our classes:

[% inc file="match.py" keep="equal" %]

Since we're using [%i "inheritance" %] to implement our matchers,
we write the check for equality in two parts.
The [%i "parent class" %] `Match` performs the checks that all classes need to perform
(in this case,
that the objects being compared have the same
[%g concrete_class "concrete class" %]).
If the [%i "child class" %] needs to do any more checking
(for example, that the characters in two `Lit` objects are the same)
it calls up to the parent method first,
then adds its own tests.

<div class="callout" markdown="1">

### They're Just Methods

[%g operator_overloading "Operator overloading" %]
relies on the fact that when Python sees `a == b` it calls `a.__eq__(b)`.
Similarly,
`a + b` is "just" a called to `a.__add__(b)`, and so on,
so if we give our classes methods with the right names,
we can manipulates objects of those classes using familiar operations.

</div>

## Summary {: #parse-summary}

[% figure
   slug="parse-concept-map"
   img="concept_map.svg"
   alt="Concept map for parser"
   caption="Parser concept map."
   cls="here"
%]

## Exercises {: #parse-exercises}

### Escape Characters {: .exercise}

Modify the parser to handle escape characters,
so that (for example) `\*` is interpreted as a literal '*' character
and `\\` is interpreted as a literal backslash.

### Character Sets {: .exercise}

Modify the parser so that expressions like `[xyz]` are interpreted to mean
"match any one of the characters 'x', 'y', or 'z'".
(Note that this is a shorthand for `{x,y,z}`.)

### Negation {: .exercise}

Modify the parser so that `[!abc]` is interpreted as
"none of the characters 'a', 'b', or 'c'".

### Nested Lists {: .exercise}

Write a function that accepts a string representing nested lists containing numbers
and returns the actual list.
For example, the input `[1, [2, [3, 4], 5]]`
should produce the corresponding Python list.

### Simple Arithmetic {: .exercise}

Write a function that accepts a string consisting of numbers
and the basic arithmetic operations `+`, `-`, `*`, and `/`
and produces a nested structure showing the operations
in the correct order.
For example,
`1 + 2 * 3` should produce
`["+", 1, ["*", 2, 3]]`.

Commit message:

fix: revisions to parsing chapter

src/parse/index.md, after:

---
abstract: >
    A parser turns text that's easy for a human being to read
    into a data structure that a computer can work with.
    The complete parser for a language like Python can be very complex,
    but this chapter illustrates the key ideas
    by building a parser for the simple filename matching patterns
    implemented in the previous chapter.
syllabus:
-   Parsing transforms text that's easy for people to read into objects that are easy for computers to work with.
-   A grammar defines the textual patterns that a parser recognizes.
-   Most parsers tokenize input text and then analyze the tokens.
-   Most parsers need to implement some form of precedence to prioritize different patterns.
-   Operations like addition and function call work just like user-defined functions.
-   Programs can overload built-in operators by defining specially-named methods
    that are recognized by the compiler or interpreter.
depends:
-   glob
---

We constructed objects to match patterns in [%x glob %],
but an [%i "expression" %] like `"2023-*{pdf,txt}"`
is a lot easier to read and write
than code like `Lit("2023-", Any(Either("pdf", "txt")))`.
If we want to use the former,
we need a [%g parser "parser" %]
to convert those human-readable strings into machine-comprehensible objects.

[%t parse-grammar %] shows the [%g grammar "grammar" %] our parser will handle.
When we are done,
our parser should be able to recognize that `2023-*.{pdf,txt}` means
the [%i "literal" %] `2023-`,
any characters,
a literal `.`,
and then either a literal `pdf` or a literal `txt`.

<div class="table" id="parse-grammar" caption="Glob grammar." markdown="1">
| Meaning                   | Character       |
| ------------------------- | --------------- |
| Any literal character *c* | *c*             |
| Zero or more characters   | `*`             |
| Alternatives              | `{`*x*`,`*y*`}` |
</div>

<div class="callout" markdown="1">

### Please Don't Write Parsers

Languages that are comfortable for people to read and write
are usually difficult for computers to understand
and vice versa,
so we need parsers to translate the former into the latter.
However,
the world doesn't need more file formats:
please use [%g csv "CSV" %], [%g json "JSON" %], [%g yaml "YAML" %],
or something else that already has an acronym
rather than inventing something of your own.

</div>

## Tokenizing {: #parse-token}

Most parsers are written in two parts ([%f parse-pipeline %]).
The first stage groups characters into atoms of text called "[%g token "tokens" %]",
which are meaningful pieces of text
like the digits making up a number or the letters making up a variable name.
Our grammar's tokens are the special characters `,`, `{`, `}`, and `*`.
Any sequence of one or more other characters is a single multi-letter token.
This classification determines the design of our [%g tokenizer "tokenizer" %]:

1.  If a character is not special,
    then append it to the current literal (if there is one)
    or start a new literal (if there isn't).

1.  If a character *is* special,
    then close the existing literal (if there is one)
    and create a token for the special character.
    Note that the `,` character closes a literal but doesn't produce a token.

[% figure
   slug="parse-pipeline"
   img="pipeline.svg"
   alt="Parsing pipeline"
   caption="Stages in parsing pipeline."
%]

The result of tokenization is a flat list of tokens.
The second stage of parsing assembles tokens to create
an [%g abstract_syntax_tree "abstract syntax tree" %] (AST)
that represents the structure of what was parsed.
We will re-use the classes defined in [%x glob %] for this purpose.

Before we start writing our tokenizer,
we have to decide whether to implement it as a set of functions
or as one or more classes.
Based on previous experience, we choose the latter:
this tokenizer is simple enough that we'll only need a handful of functions,
but one capable of handling a language like Python would be much larger,
and classes are a handy way to group related functions together.

The main method of our tokenizer looks like this:

[% inc file="tokenizer.py" keep="tok" %]

This method calls `self._setup()` at the start
so that the tokenizer can be re-used.
It *doesn't* call `self._add()` for regular characters;
instead,
it creates a `Lit` entry when it encounters a special character
(i.e., when the current literal ends)
and after all the input has been parsed
(to capture the last literal).

The method `self._add` adds the current thing to the list of tokens.
As a special case,
`self._add(None)` means "add the literal but nothing else"
([%f parse-tokenize %]):

[% inc file="tokenizer.py" keep="add" %]

[% figure
   slug="parse-tokenize"
   img="tokenize.svg"
   alt="Tokenizing"
   caption="Steps in tokenizing a string."
%]

Finally,
we work backward to initialize the tokenizer when we construct it
and to define the set of characters that make up literals:

[% inc file="tokenizer.py" keep="class" %]

<div class="callout" markdown="1">

### A Simple Constant

The code fragment above defines `CHARS` to be
a set containing ASCII letters and digits.
We use a set for speed:
if we used a list,
Python would have to search through it each time we wanted to check a character,
but finding something in a set is much faster.
[%x binary %] will explain why the word "ASCII" appears in
`string` library's definition of characters,
but using it and `string.digits` greatly reduces the chances of us
typing `"abcdeghi…yz"` rather than `"abcdefghi…yz"`.
(The fact that it took you a moment to spot the missing letter 'f'
proves this point.)

</div>

We can now write a few tests to check that
the tokenizer is producing a list of lists
in which each sub-list represents a single token:

<div class="pagebreak"></div>

[% inc file="test_tokenizer.py" keep="tests" %]

## Parsing {: #parse-parse}

We now need to turn the list of tokens into a tree.
Just as we used a class for tokenizing,
we will create one for parsing
and give it a `_parse` method to start things off.
This method doesn't do any conversion itself.
Instead,
it takes a token off the front of the list
and figures out which method handles tokens of that kind:

[% inc file="parser.py" keep="parse" %]

The handlers for `Any` and `Lit` are straightforward:

[% inc file="parser.py" keep="simple" %]

`Either` is a little messier.
We didn't save the commas,
so we'll just pull two tokens and store them
after checking to make sure that we actually *have* two tokens:

[% inc file="parser.py" keep="either" %]

An alternative approach is to take tokens from the list
until we see an `EitherEnd` marker:

[% inc file="better_parser.py" keep="either" %]

This achieves the same thing in the two-token case
but allows us to write alternatives with more options
without changing the code
(assuming you solved the "Multiple Alternatives" exercise in [%x glob %]).
Tests confirm that we're on the right track:

[% inc file="test_parser.py" keep="sample" %]

This test assumes we can compare `Match` objects using `==`,
just as we would compare numbers or strings.
so we add a `__eq__` method to our classes:

[% inc file="match.py" keep="equal" %]

Since we're using [%i "inheritance" %] to implement our matchers,
we write the check for equality in two parts.
The [%i "parent class" %] `Match` performs the checks that all classes need to perform
(in this case,
that the objects being compared have the same
[%g concrete_class "concrete class" %]).
If the [%i "child class" %] needs to do any more checking
(for example, that the characters in two `Lit` objects are the same)
it calls up to the parent method first,
then adds its own tests.

<div class="callout" markdown="1">

### They're Just Methods

[%g operator_overloading "Operator overloading" %]
relies on the fact that when Python sees `a == b` it calls `a.__eq__(b)`.
Similarly,
`a + b` is "just" a call to `a.__add__(b)`,
so if we create methods with the right names,
we can manipulate objects using familiar operations.

</div>

## Summary {: #parse-summary}

[%f parse-concept-map %] summarizes the key ideas in this chapter.
Once again,
while it's useful to understand how parsers work,
please don't create new data formats that need new parsers
if you can possibly avoid it.

[% figure
   slug="parse-concept-map"
   img="concept_map.svg"
   alt="Concept map for parser"
   caption="Parser concept map."
   cls="here"
%]

## Exercises {: #parse-exercises}

### Escape Characters {: .exercise}

Modify the parser to handle escape characters,
so that (for example) `\*` is interpreted as a literal '*' character
and `\\` is interpreted as a literal backslash.

### Character Sets {: .exercise}

Modify the parser so that expressions like `[xyz]` are interpreted to mean
"match any one of those three characters".
(Note that this is a shorthand for `{x,y,z}`.)

### Negation {: .exercise}

Modify the parser so that `[!abc]` is interpreted as
"match anything *except* one of those three characters".

### Nested Lists {: .exercise}

Write a function that accepts a string representing nested lists containing numbers
and returns the actual list.
For example, the input `[1, [2, [3, 4], 5]]`
should produce the corresponding Python list.

### Simple Arithmetic {: .exercise}

Write a function that accepts a string consisting of numbers
and the basic arithmetic operations `+`, `-`, `*`, and `/`,
and produces a nested structure showing the operations
in the correct order.
For example,
`1 + 2 * 3` should produce
`["+", 1, ["*", 2, 3]]`.
