src/debugger/index.md, before:

---
syllabus:
-   Interactive programs can be tested by simulating input and recording output.
-   Testing interactive programs is easier if their inputs and outputs can easily be replaced with mock objects.
-   Debuggers usually implement breakpoints by temporarily replacing actual instructions with special ones.
-   Using lookup tables for function or method dispatch makes programs easier to extend.
depends:
-   vm
-   viewer
status: "revised 2023-08-15"
---

We have finally come to another of the questions that sparked this book:
how does a [%g debugger "debugger" %] work?
Debuggers are as much a part of good programmers' lives as version control
but are taught far less often
(in part, we believe, because it's harder to create homework questions for them).
This chapter builds a simple single-stepping debugger
for the [%i "virtual machine" %] of [%x vm %]
and shows how we can test interactive applications.
If you would like to go further and (much) deeper,
please have a look at [%i "Brand, Sy" "Sy Brand's" url="brand_sy" %] [tutorial][debugger_tutorial].

## One Step at a Time {: #debugger-step}

Before we start work,
let's consolidate and reorganize the code in our virtual machine.
The methods all work as they did before,
but we've made a few changes to allow for future growth.
The first is to pass an output stream to the constructor,
which by default will be `sys.stdout`:

[% inc file="vm_base.py" keep="init" %]

We then replace every `print` statement with
a call to new method called `write`.
For example,
the "print register" instruction calls `self.write`:

[% inc file="vm_base.py" keep="prr" %]

For now,
`write` just prints things to whatever output stream the VM was given:

[% inc file="vm_base.py" keep="write" %]

Our virtual machine now loads a program and runs it to completion,
so it's either running or finished.
We want to add a third state for single-step execution,
so let's start by adding an [%i "enumeration" %] to `architecture.py`:

[% inc file="architecture.py" keep="state" %]

We could use strings to keep track of states,
but as soon as there are more than two there are likely to be many,
and having them spelled out makes it easier for the next person
to find out what they can be.
{: .continue}

We are now in a better position to move forward,
so we derive a new class from our refactored VM:

[% inc file="vm_step.py" keep="derive" %]

(Again,
if we were writing this code under normal circumstances
we would enhance the existing class,
but since we want to keep several versions around for teaching,
we derive and extend.)
{: .continue}

The old `run` method kept going until the program finished.
The new `run` method is necessarily more complicated.
The VM is initially in the `STEPPING` state
(because if we start it in the `RUNNING` state
we would never have an opportunity to interact with it
to change its state).
As long as the program isn't finished
we fetch, decode, and execute the next instruction as usual,
but stop after each one if we're single-stepping:

[% inc file="vm_step.py" keep="run" %]

The interaction method needs to handle several cases:

1.  The user enters an empty line (i.e., presses return),
    in which case it loops around and waits for something else.

2.  The user asks to [%g disassemble "disassemble" %] the current instruction
    or show the contents of memory,
    in which case it does that and loops around.

3.  The user wants to quit,
    so `interact` changes the VM's state to `FINISHED`.

4.  The user wants to run the rest of the program without stopping,
    so `interact` changes VM's state to `RUNNING`.

5.  The user wants to execute a single step,
    in which case the method breaks out of the loop
    without changing the VM's state.
    `run` will then see that the VM is still in single-stepping mode
    and execute a single instruction.

The method that disassembles an instruction to show us what we're about to do
checks a [%g reverse_lookup "reverse lookup table" %]
to create a printable representation of an instruction and its operands:

[% inc file="vm_step.py" keep="disassemble" %]

We build the reverse lookup table from the `OPS` table in `architecture.py`
so that it's always in sync with the table we're using to construct operations
([%f debugger-table %]):

[% inc file="vm_step.py" keep="lookup" %]

If we wrote the reverse lookup table ourselves,
sooner or later we'd forget to update it when updating the forward lookup table.
{: .continue}

[% figure
   slug="debugger-table"
   img="table.svg"
   alt="Building a consistent lookup table"
   caption="Building a consistent lookup table."
%]

But there's a more important change in this new virtual machine.
It doesn't use Python's built-in `input` function to get input from the user—or rather,
it does,
but only by default.
The constructor for our single-stepping VM is:

[% inc file="vm_step.py" keep="init" %]

and its `read` method is:
{: .continue}

[% inc file="vm_step.py" keep="read" %]

As with the `write` method introduced in the previous section,
adding this wrapper method will help us with testing,
which is our next topic.

## Testing {: #debugger-test}

Our debugger is an interactive application
that waits for input from the user,
does something that may or may not print output,
then waits again.
The waiting is a problem for tools like [pytest][pytest],
which expect the function being tested to run to completion after being launched.

To make our single-stepping VM testable,
we have to give it input when it wants some
and capture its output for later inspection.
We had a similar problem when testing
the web server of [%x ftp %] and the editor of [%x undo %],
and our solution is the similar:
we will replace `input` and `print` with [%i "mock object" "mock objects" %].

As shown earlier,
our VM uses an object with a `write` method to produce output.
We can define a class that provides this method,
but which saves messages in a list for later inspection
instead of printing them:

[% inc file="test_vm.py" keep="writer" %]

Similarly,
our VM gets input from a function that takes a prompt as an argument
and returns whatever the user typed.
We can define a class with a `__call__` method that acts like such a function,
but which returns strings from a list instead of waiting for the user:

[% inc file="test_vm.py" keep="reader" %]

With these in hand,
we can write a [%i "helper function" %] that compiles a program,
creates a virtual machine,
and runs it with a mock reader and a mock writer:

[% inc file="test_vm.py" keep="execute" %]

We are now ready to start writing tests.
Here's one that checks the debugger's "disassemble" command:

[% inc file="test_vm.py" keep="disassemble" %]

Line by line, it:
{: .continue}

1.  Creates the program to test
    (which in this case consists of a single `hlt` instruction).

2.  Creates a `Reader` that will supply the commands `"d"` (for "disassemble")
    and `"q"` (for "quit") in that order.

3.  Creates a `Writer` to capture the program's output.

4.  Runs the program in a fresh VM with that reader and writer.

5.  Checks that the output captured in the writer is correct.

Defining two classes and a helper function to test a one-line program
may seem like a lot of work,
but we're not testing the one-line program or the VM:
we're testing the debugger.
For example,
the reader in the test below
issues three `"s"` (single-step) commands and then a `"q"` command:

[% inc file="test_vm.py" keep="print" %]

In response,
the debugger steps through the first three instructions
and then stops the VM before it can execute the second print instruction.
This test actually uncovered a bug in an earlier version of the debugger
in which it would always execute one more instruction when told to quit.
Interactive testing might have spotted that,
but it could easily reappear;
this test will warn us if it does.

Our `Reader` and `Writer` aren't good for much beyond testing our VM,
but there are other tools that can simulate input and output
for a wider range of applications.
[Expect][expect] (which can be used through Python's [`pexpect`][pexpect] module)
is often used to script command-line applications
as well as to test them.
[Selenium][selenium] and [Cypress][cypress] do the same for browser-based applications:
programmers can use them to simulate mouse clicks,
window resizing,
and other events,
then check the contents of the page that the application produces in response.
They are all more difficult to set up and use than a simple test that 1+1 is 2,
but that's because the things they do are genuinely complex.
Designing applications with testing in mind—for example,
routing all input and output through a single method each—helps
reduce that complexity.

## Extensibility {: #debugger-extensibility}

We are going to add one more big feature to our debugger,
but before we do,
let's do some [%i "refactor" "refactoring" %].
First,
we move every interactive operation into a method of its own
that does something
and then returns `True` if the debugger is supposed to stay
in interactive mode
and `False` if interaction is over.
The method for showing the contents of memory is:

[% inc file="vm_extend.py" keep="memory" %]

while the one for advancing one step is:
{: .continue}

[% inc file="vm_extend.py" keep="step" %]

and so on.
Once that's done,
we modify `interact` to choose operations from a lookup table
called `self.handlers`.
Its keys are the commands typed by the user
and its values are the operation methods we just created:
{: .continue}

[% inc file="vm_extend.py" keep="interact" %]

Finally,
we extend the virtual machine's constructor
to build the required lookup table.
For convenience,
we [%i "register (in code)" "register" %] the methods
under both single-letter keys
and longer command names:

[% inc file="vm_extend.py" keep="init" %]

As in previous chapters,
creating a lookup table like this makes the class easier to extend.
If we want to add another command
(which we will do in the next section)
we just add a method to perform the operation
and register it in the lookup table.
So long as new commands don't need anything more than
the address of the current instruction,
we never need to modify `interact` again.

## Breakpoints {: #debugger-breakpoints}

Suppose we suspect there's a bug in our program
that only occurs after several thousand lines of code have been executed.
We would have to be pretty desperate to single-step through all of that even once,
much less dozens of times as we're exploring new ideas or trying new fixes.
Instead,
we want to set a [%g breakpoint "breakpoint" %]
to tell the computer to stop at a particular location
and drop us into the debugger.
(We might even use
a [%g conditional_breakpoint "conditional breakpoint" %]
that would only stop if (for example)
the variable `x` was zero at that point,
but we'll leave that for the exercises.)

The easiest way to implement breakpoints would be
to have the VM store their addresses in a set.
We would then modify `run` to check that set
each time it was supposed to fetch a new instruction,
and stop if it was at one of those addresses
([%f debugger-beside %]).

[% figure
   slug="debugger-beside"
   img="beside.svg"
   alt="Storing breakpoint addresses beside the program"
   caption="Storing breakpoints beside the program."
%]

An alternative design is to add a new instruction to our architecture called `brk`.
When the user sets a breakpoint at some address,
we replace the instruction at that address with a breakpoint instruction
and store the original instruction in a lookup table.
If the user later
[%g clear_breakpoint "clears" %]
the breakpoint,
we copy the original instruction back into place,
and if the VM encounters a breakpoint instruction while its running,
it drops into interactive mode
([%f debugger-break %]).

[% figure
   slug="debugger-break"
   img="break.svg"
   alt="Inserting breakpoint instructions"
   caption="Inserting breakpoints into a program."
%]

Putting breakpoints inline is more complicated than storing them beside the program,
but it is how debuggers for low-level languages like C actually work.
It also makes the virtual machine more efficient:
instead of spending a few (actual) instructions checking a breakpoint table
every time we execute an instruction,
we only pay a price when we actually encounter a breakpoint.
The difference isn't important in our little toy,
but little savings like this add up quickly
in a real interpreter for a language like Python or JavaScript.

The first step in implementing breakpoints is
to add two more commands to the lookup table
we created in the previous section:

[% inc file="vm_break.py" keep="init" %]

To add a breakpoint,
we copy the instruction at the given address
into the dictionary `self.breaks`
and replace it with a breakpoint instruction:

[% inc file="vm_break.py" keep="add" %]

Notice that if there's already a breakpoint in place,
we don't do anything.
We also return `True` to tell `interact`
to wait for another command from the user.
{: .continue}

Clearing a breakpoint is just as easy:

[% inc file="vm_break.py" keep="clear" %]

We also update `show` to display any breakpoints that have been set:

[% inc file="vm_break.py" keep="show" %]

Notice how the implementation first calls the parent's `show` method
to display everything we've been displaying so far,
then adds a few lines to display extra information.
Extending methods by [%i "upcall" "upcalling" %] this way
saves us typing,
and ensures that changes in the parent class
will automatically show up in the [%i "child class" %].

The final step is to change the `run` method
so that the VM actually stops at a breakpoint.
The whole method is:

[% inc file="vm_break.py" keep="run" %]

Given everything we've done so far,
the logic is relatively straightforward.
If the instruction is a breakpoint,
the VM fetches and decodes the original from the breakpoint lookup table.
It then gives the user a chance to interact
before executing that original instruction.
If the instruction *isn't* a breakpoint,
on the other hand,
the VM interacts with the user if it is in single-stepping mode,
and then carries on as before.

We can test our new-and-improved VM
using the tools developed earlier in this chapter,
but even before we do that,
the changes to `run` tell us that we should re-think some of our design.
Using a lookup table for interactive commands
allowed us to add commands without modifying `interact`;
another lookup table would enable us to add new instructions
without having to modify `run`.
We will explore this in the exercises.

## Summary {: #debugger-summary}

[% figure
   slug="debugger-concept-map"
   img="concept_map.svg"
   alt="Concept map for debugger"
   caption="Concepts for debugger."
   cls="here"
%]

## Exercises {: #debugger-exercises}

### Show Memory Range {: .exercise}

Modify the debugger so that if the user provides a single address to the `"memory"` command,
the debugger shows the value at that address,
while if the user provides two addresses,
the debugger shows all the memory between those addresses.

1.  How did this change the way command lookup and execution work?

2.  Is your solution general enough to handle likely future changes without rewriting?

### Breakpoint Addresses {: .exercise}

Modify the debugger so that if the user provides a single address to the `"break"` or `"clear"` command,
it sets or clears the breakpoint at that address.
Did this feature require any changes beyond those made for the previous exercise?

### Command Completion {: .exercise}

Modify the debugger to recognize commands based on any number of distinct leading characters.
For example,
any of `"m"`, `"me"`, `"mem"`, and so on should trigger the `_do_memory` method.
Programmers should _not_ have to specify all these options themselves;
instead,
they should be able to specify the full command name and the method it corresponds to,
and the VM's constructor should take care of the rest.

### Conditional Breakpoints {: .exercise}

Modify the debugger so that users can specify conditions for breakpoints,
i.e.,
can specify that the VM should only stop at a location
if R0 contains zero
or if the value at a particular location in memory is greater than 3.
(This exercise is potentially very large;
you may restrict the kinds of conditions the user can set to make it more manageable,
or explore ways of using `eval` to support the general case.)

### Watchpoints {: .exercise}

Modify the debugger and VM so that the user can create
[%g watchpoint "watchpoints" %],
i.e.,
can specify that the debugger should halt the VM
when the value at a particular address changes.
For example,
if the user specifies a watchpoint for address 0x0010,
then the VM automatically halts whenever a new value is stored at that location.

### Instruction Lookup {: .exercise}

Modify the virtual machine so that `execute` looks up instructions in a table
in the same way as debugger commands.

### Changing Memory {: .exercise}

Modify the debugger so that users can change the values in registers
or at particular addresses in memory while the program is running.

### Displaying Source {: .exercise}

1.  Modify the debugger so that when the debugger is displaying memory,
    it shows the [%i "assembly code" %] instructions
    corresponding to particular addresses
    as well as the numeric codes.

2.  How can the debugger distinguish between locations that contain instructions
    and locations that contain data?

### Interleaving Testing {: .exercise}

Modify the testing tools developed in this chapter
so that users can specify input and output as they would naturally occur,
i.e.,
can specify one or more commands,
then the output expected from those commands,
then some more input and the corresponding output,
and so on.

### Pattern Matching in Tests {: .exercise}

1.  Tools like [Expect][expect] allow programmers to match output with regular expressions.
    Modify the testing tools developed in this chapter to do that as well.

2.  When is this useful?
    When is it potentially dangerous?

Commit message:

fix: clarify discussion of debugger
Closes #59

src/debugger/index.md, after:

---
syllabus:
-   Interactive programs can be tested by simulating input and recording output.
-   Testing interactive programs is easier if their inputs and outputs can easily be replaced with mock objects.
-   Debuggers usually implement breakpoints by temporarily replacing actual instructions with special ones.
-   Using lookup tables for function or method dispatch makes programs easier to extend.
depends:
-   vm
-   viewer
status: "revised 2023-08-15"
---

We have finally come to another of the questions that sparked this book:
how does a [%g debugger "debugger" %] work?
Debuggers are as much a part of good programmers' lives as version control
but are taught far less often
(in part, we believe, because it's harder to create homework questions for them).
This chapter builds a simple single-stepping debugger
for the [%i "virtual machine" %] of [%x vm %]
and shows how we can test interactive applications.
If you would like to go further and (much) deeper,
please have a look at [%i "Brand, Sy" "Sy Brand's" url="brand_sy" %] [tutorial][debugger_tutorial].

## One Step at a Time {: #debugger-step}

Before we start work,
let's consolidate and reorganize the code in our virtual machine.
The methods all work as they did before,
but we've made a few changes to allow for future growth.
The first is to pass an output stream to the constructor,
which by default will be `sys.stdout`:

[% inc file="vm_base.py" keep="init" %]

We then replace every `print` statement with
a call to new method called `write`.
For example,
the "print register" instruction calls `self.write`:

[% inc file="vm_base.py" keep="prr" %]

For now,
`write` just prints things to whatever output stream the VM was given:

[% inc file="vm_base.py" keep="write" %]

Our virtual machine now loads a program and runs it to completion,
so it's either running or finished.
We want to add a third state for single-step execution,
so let's start by adding an [%i "enumeration" %] to `architecture.py`:

[% inc file="architecture.py" keep="state" %]

We could use strings to keep track of states,
but as soon as there are more than two there are likely to be many,
and having them spelled out makes it easier for the next person
to find out what they can be.
{: .continue}

We are now in a better position to move forward,
so we derive a new class from our refactored VM:

[% inc file="vm_step.py" keep="derive" %]

(Again,
if we were writing this code under normal circumstances
we would enhance the existing class,
but since we want to keep several versions around for teaching,
we derive and extend.)
{: .continue}

The old `run` method kept going until the program finished.
The new `run` method is necessarily more complicated.
The VM is initially in the `STEPPING` state
(because if we start it in the `RUNNING` state
we would never have an opportunity to interact with it
to change its state).
As long as the program isn't finished
we fetch, decode, and execute the next instruction as usual,
but stop after each one if we're single-stepping:

[% inc file="vm_step.py" keep="run" %]

The interaction method needs to handle several cases:

1.  The user enters an empty line (i.e., presses return),
    in which case it loops around and waits for something else.

2.  The user asks to [%g disassemble "disassemble" %] the current instruction
    or show the contents of memory,
    in which case it does that and loops around.

3.  The user wants to quit,
    so `interact` changes the VM's state to `FINISHED`.

4.  The user wants to run the rest of the program without stopping,
    so `interact` changes VM's state to `RUNNING`.

5.  The user wants to execute a single step,
    in which case the method breaks out of the loop
    without changing the VM's state.
    `run` will then see that the VM is still in single-stepping mode
    and execute a single instruction.

The method that disassembles an instruction to show us what we're about to do
checks a [%g reverse_lookup "reverse lookup table" %]
to create a printable representation of an instruction and its operands:

[% inc file="vm_step.py" keep="disassemble" %]

We build the reverse lookup table from the `OPS` table in `architecture.py`
so that it's always in sync with the table we're using to construct operations
([%f debugger-table %]):

[% inc file="vm_step.py" keep="lookup" %]

If we wrote the reverse lookup table ourselves,
sooner or later we'd forget to update it when updating the forward lookup table.
{: .continue}

[% figure
   slug="debugger-table"
   img="table.svg"
   alt="Building a consistent lookup table"
   caption="Building a consistent lookup table."
%]

But there's a more important change in this new virtual machine.
It doesn't use Python's built-in `input` function to get input from the user—or rather,
it does,
but only by default.
The constructor for our single-stepping VM is:

[% inc file="vm_step.py" keep="init" %]

and its `read` method is:
{: .continue}

[% inc file="vm_step.py" keep="read" %]

As with the `write` method introduced in the previous section,
adding this wrapper method will help us with testing,
which is our next topic.

## Testing {: #debugger-test}

Our debugger is an interactive application
that waits for input from the user,
does something that may or may not print output,
then waits again.
The waiting is a problem for tools like [pytest][pytest],
which expect the function being tested to run to completion after being launched.

To make our single-stepping VM testable,
we have to give it input when it wants some
and capture its output for later inspection.
We had a similar problem when testing
the web server of [%x ftp %] and the editor of [%x undo %],
and our solution is the similar:
we will replace `input` and `print` with [%i "mock object" "mock objects" %].

As shown earlier,
our VM uses an object with a `write` method to produce output.
We can define a class that provides this method,
but which saves messages in a list for later inspection
instead of printing them:

[% inc file="test_vm.py" keep="writer" %]

Similarly,
our VM gets input from a function that takes a prompt as an argument
and returns whatever the user typed.
We can define a class with a `__call__` method that acts like such a function,
but which returns strings from a list instead of waiting for the user:

[% inc file="test_vm.py" keep="reader" %]

With these in hand,
we can write a [%i "helper function" %] that compiles a program,
creates a virtual machine,
and runs it with a mock reader and a mock writer:

[% inc file="test_vm.py" keep="execute" %]

We are now ready to start writing tests.
Here's one that checks the debugger's "disassemble" command:

[% inc file="test_vm.py" keep="disassemble" %]

Line by line, it:
{: .continue}

1.  Creates the program to test
    (which in this case consists of a single `hlt` instruction).

2.  Creates a `Reader` that will supply the commands `"d"` (for "disassemble")
    and `"q"` (for "quit") in that order.

3.  Creates a `Writer` to capture the program's output.

4.  Runs the program in a fresh VM with that reader and writer.

5.  Checks that the output captured in the writer is correct.

Defining two classes and a helper function to test a one-line program
may seem like a lot of work,
but we're not testing the one-line program or the VM:
we're testing the debugger.
For example,
the close below:

1.  Defines a multiline string that loads 55 into R0,
    prints it,
    and then loads 65 into the same register to print
    before halting.

2.  Creates a `Reader`
    that issues three `"s"` (single-step) commands and a `"q"` (quit) command.
    Note that this isn't enough to reach the second print command.

3.  Executes the program.

4.  Checks that the `Writer` has only recorded one line of output, not two.

[% inc file="test_vm.py" keep="print" %]

This test actually uncovered a bug in an earlier version of the debugger
in which it would always execute one more instruction when told to quit.
Interactive testing might have spotted that,
but it could easily reappear;
this test will warn us if it does.

Our `Reader` and `Writer` aren't good for much beyond testing our VM,
but there are other tools that can simulate input and output
for a wider range of applications.
[Expect][expect] (which can be used through Python's [`pexpect`][pexpect] module)
is often used to script command-line applications
as well as to test them.
[Selenium][selenium] and [Cypress][cypress] do the same for browser-based applications:
programmers can use them to simulate mouse clicks,
window resizing,
and other events,
then check the contents of the page that the application produces in response.
They are all more difficult to set up and use than a simple test that 1+1 is 2,
but that's because the things they do are genuinely complex.
Designing applications with testing in mind—for example,
routing all input and output through a single method each—helps
reduce that complexity.

## Extensibility {: #debugger-extensibility}

We are going to add one more big feature to our debugger,
but before we do,
let's do some [%i "refactor" "refactoring" %].
First,
we move every interactive operation into a method of its own
that does something
and then returns `True` if the debugger is supposed to stay
in interactive mode
and `False` if interaction is over.
The method for showing the contents of memory is:

[% inc file="vm_extend.py" keep="memory" %]

while the one for advancing one step is:
{: .continue}

[% inc file="vm_extend.py" keep="step" %]

and so on.
Once that's done,
we modify `interact` to choose operations from a lookup table
called `self.handlers`.
Its keys are the commands typed by the user
and its values are the operation methods we just created:
{: .continue}

[% inc file="vm_extend.py" keep="interact" %]

Finally,
we extend the virtual machine's constructor
to build the required lookup table.
For convenience,
we [%i "register (in code)" "register" %] the methods
under both single-letter keys
and longer command names:

[% inc file="vm_extend.py" keep="init" %]

As in previous chapters,
creating a lookup table like this makes the class easier to extend.
If we want to add another command
(which we will do in the next section)
we just add a method to perform the operation
and register it in the lookup table.
So long as new commands don't need anything more than
the address of the current instruction,
we never need to modify `interact` again.

## Breakpoints {: #debugger-breakpoints}

Suppose we suspect there's a bug in our program
that only occurs after several thousand lines of code have been executed.
We would have to be pretty desperate to single-step through all of that even once,
much less dozens of times as we're exploring new ideas or trying new fixes.
Instead,
we want to set a [%g breakpoint "breakpoint" %]
to tell the computer to stop at a particular location
and drop us into the debugger.
(We might even use
a [%g conditional_breakpoint "conditional breakpoint" %]
that would only stop if (for example)
the variable `x` was zero at that point,
but we'll leave that for the exercises.)

The easiest way to implement breakpoints would be
to have the VM store their addresses in a set.
We would then modify `run` to check that set
each time it was supposed to fetch a new instruction,
and stop if it was at one of those addresses
([%f debugger-beside %]).

[% figure
   slug="debugger-beside"
   img="beside.svg"
   alt="Storing breakpoint addresses beside the program"
   caption="Storing breakpoints beside the program."
%]

An alternative design is to add a new instruction to our architecture called `brk`.
When the user sets a breakpoint at some address,
we replace the instruction at that address with a breakpoint instruction
and store the original instruction in a lookup table.
If the user later
[%g clear_breakpoint "clears" %]
the breakpoint,
we copy the original instruction back into place,
and if the VM encounters a breakpoint instruction while its running,
it drops into interactive mode
([%f debugger-break %]).

[% figure
   slug="debugger-break"
   img="break.svg"
   alt="Inserting breakpoint instructions"
   caption="Inserting breakpoints into a program."
%]

Putting breakpoints inline is more complicated than storing them beside the program,
but it is how debuggers for low-level languages like C actually work.
It also makes the virtual machine more efficient:
instead of spending a few (actual) instructions checking a breakpoint table
every time we execute an instruction,
we only pay a price when we actually encounter a breakpoint.
The difference isn't important in our little toy,
but little savings like this add up quickly
in a real interpreter for a language like Python or JavaScript.

The first step in implementing breakpoints is
to add two more commands to the lookup table
we created in the previous section:

[% inc file="vm_break.py" keep="init" %]

To add a breakpoint,
we copy the instruction at the given address
into the dictionary `self.breaks`
and replace it with a breakpoint instruction:

[% inc file="vm_break.py" keep="add" %]

Notice that if there's already a breakpoint in place,
we don't do anything.
We also return `True` to tell `interact`
to wait for another command from the user.
{: .continue}

Clearing a breakpoint is just as easy:

[% inc file="vm_break.py" keep="clear" %]

We also update `show` to display any breakpoints that have been set:

[% inc file="vm_break.py" keep="show" %]

Notice how the implementation first calls the parent's `show` method
to display everything we've been displaying so far,
then adds a few lines to display extra information.
Extending methods by [%i "upcall" "upcalling" %] this way
saves us typing,
and ensures that changes in the parent class
will automatically show up in the [%i "child class" %].

The final step is to change the `run` method
so that the VM actually stops at a breakpoint.
The whole method is:

[% inc file="vm_break.py" keep="run" %]

Given everything we've done so far,
the logic is relatively straightforward.
If the instruction is a breakpoint,
the VM fetches and decodes the original from the breakpoint lookup table.
It then gives the user a chance to interact
before executing that original instruction.
If the instruction *isn't* a breakpoint,
on the other hand,
the VM interacts with the user if it is in single-stepping mode,
and then carries on as before.

We can test our new-and-improved VM
using the tools developed earlier in this chapter,
but even before we do that,
the changes to `run` tell us that we should re-think some of our design.
Using a lookup table for interactive commands
allowed us to add commands without modifying `interact`;
another lookup table would enable us to add new instructions
without having to modify `run`.
We will explore this in the exercises.

## Summary {: #debugger-summary}

[% figure
   slug="debugger-concept-map"
   img="concept_map.svg"
   alt="Concept map for debugger"
   caption="Concepts for debugger."
   cls="here"
%]

## Exercises {: #debugger-exercises}

### Show Memory Range {: .exercise}

Modify the debugger so that if the user provides a single address to the `"memory"` command,
the debugger shows the value at that address,
while if the user provides two addresses,
the debugger shows all the memory between those addresses.

1.  How did this change the way command lookup and execution work?

2.  Is your solution general enough to handle likely future changes without rewriting?

### Breakpoint Addresses {: .exercise}

Modify the debugger so that if the user provides a single address to the `"break"` or `"clear"` command,
it sets or clears the breakpoint at that address.
Did this feature require any changes beyond those made for the previous exercise?

### Command Completion {: .exercise}

Modify the debugger to recognize commands based on any number of distinct leading characters.
For example,
any of `"m"`, `"me"`, `"mem"`, and so on should trigger the `_do_memory` method.
Programmers should _not_ have to specify all these options themselves;
instead,
they should be able to specify the full command name and the method it corresponds to,
and the VM's constructor should take care of the rest.

### Conditional Breakpoints {: .exercise}

Modify the debugger so that users can specify conditions for breakpoints,
i.e.,
can specify that the VM should only stop at a location
if R0 contains zero
or if the value at a particular location in memory is greater than 3.
(This exercise is potentially very large;
you may restrict the kinds of conditions the user can set to make it more manageable,
or explore ways of using `eval` to support the general case.)

### Watchpoints {: .exercise}

Modify the debugger and VM so that the user can create
[%g watchpoint "watchpoints" %],
i.e.,
can specify that the debugger should halt the VM
when the value at a particular address changes.
For example,
if the user specifies a watchpoint for address 0x0010,
then the VM automatically halts whenever a new value is stored at that location.

### Instruction Lookup {: .exercise}

Modify the virtual machine so that `execute` looks up instructions in a table
in the same way as debugger commands.

### Changing Memory {: .exercise}

Modify the debugger so that users can change the values in registers
or at particular addresses in memory while the program is running.

### Displaying Source {: .exercise}

1.  Modify the debugger so that when the debugger is displaying memory,
    it shows the [%i "assembly code" %] instructions
    corresponding to particular addresses
    as well as the numeric codes.

2.  How can the debugger distinguish between locations that contain instructions
    and locations that contain data?

### Interleaving Testing {: .exercise}

Modify the testing tools developed in this chapter
so that users can specify input and output as they would naturally occur,
i.e.,
can specify one or more commands,
then the output expected from those commands,
then some more input and the corresponding output,
and so on.

### Pattern Matching in Tests {: .exercise}

1.  Tools like [Expect][expect] allow programmers to match output with regular expressions.
    Modify the testing tools developed in this chapter to do that as well.

2.  When is this useful?
    When is it potentially dangerous?
